For me, programming began at approx. 12 years old. My family bought a new Windows based PC and I wanted to install OS X on the same machine. I broke it, I broke everything. I got in a lot of trouble. If I could go back and retry, I would have broken everything again but I would have tried everything I wanted to try! (go hard or go home, amirite?)
I have always been fascinated with all aspects of tech . I mean, how can we not be fascinated with tech!? It has literally infiltrated every aspect of our daily lives. You don’t have to love it, per se. But to never stop and think, “Gee I wonder how a text message works” is bizarre, imo. From reprogramming my RC toy cars, to restyling my MySpace profile pages with basic HTML and CSS, I’ve loved it all.
Now just because I love me some technology doesn’t mean I was ready for where Flatiron was taking me. They started with a nice little gateway drug named Ruby, you may have heard of her. I am still fond of her actually. She’s syntactically sweet and just all around really fun to work with. Next thing I know, I am shivering in a dark alley looking for more. More as in anything related to programming that I could get my hands on. Whether it be Object Oriented Programming or writing raw SQL, I was addicted — with no intention on kicking the habit.
Programming has been very hard, to say the least; programming has been extremely rewarding, to say the least. Avi Flombaum (CoFounder and Dean of Students at The Flatiron School) often says, “My race, my pace”. He uses it as a reminder to not compare yourself to programmers around you. He uses it as a reminder to keep working towards the finish line at your own pace… so long as you keep working. I am sure he uses the phrase for many other reasons, but they resonate with me specifically in those two ways. One promise I made to myself was to push one commit a day to github, and that has kept me going with a pace I have come to love. I’ve been having trouble with my brand new MacBook Pro (#ThanksApple) so to keep ‘coding’ sans MacBook, I needed to get creative and figure out different ways to keep my GitHub activity alive using just my iPad / iPhone. On GitHub I have a ‘notes’ repository. In that repository I write notes and / or summaries mostly to myself, explaining a concept I’ve read about. I could have taken a break and not coded at all while my computer was out for repair, but that didn’t feel right.
There came a point where the Rails section of the Learn curriculum was kicking. my. butt. So I took a break from it all, and decided to go build a Rails app incorporating what I had learned thus far. Now, I personally learn in a very specific manner. Things gel a little harder when I am able to put them into context. So while Flatiron was taking the time to teach me the ins and outs of very particular and abstract concepts, I was getting frustrated with not knowing how said concepts applied to the real world. I took a a break from Flatiron and followed a couple of code alongs I found on the interwebs which basically landed me with my very first (and super simple) Rails app! (Check it out! dwyn.nyc) When I returned to the Flatiron curriculum, I returned like a B O S S!!! That ‘break’ for perspective was exactly what I needed. I was sooo comfortable with Rails moving forward. Have I mastered Rails yet? No way, not by a long shot! But I understand it completely differently, and I am a better programmer because of it.
Which brings me to my point: In the past when feeling defeated by programming, I would close my laptop and not return to it for days, sometimes weeks at a time. It wasn’t an intentional strategy on my part. In retrospect I believe I was experiencing a great deal of trauma with not understanding specific concepts, so I started to associate pain with my laptop (clearly I was too stubborn to reach out for help!). In present day, I’ve learned to embrace that “pain” as it’s usually very temporary. In present day I have learned to take a step back from what is blocking me; close terminal, close VSCode, go for a 15 minute walk and return to read or write about what I am struggling with. Even if I am only writing for myself, its good to get thoughts down. I take breaks from programming to pseudo-code, and that helps a great deal! I take breaks from programming and read blogposts about programming. I take breaks from programming to go learn something new (unrelated to whatever I am working on atm) that I have been meaning to check out. I even take breaks to go help a fellow students out with anything they are stuck on. Even if I don’t necessarily know how to help, it gives us a chance to learn together! (easily one of my favorites!). The point is, there is sooo much to do, sooo much to learn that completely stopping is the most counterproductive thing anyone can do for themselves.
Get creative with how you move forward with your journey. The future you waiting at the finish line will thank you for it, I promise.